a few weeks ago I was laid off while I
was on vacation visiting families in
Asia it is 12 12: a.m. now in Japan and
I just got a call from my
coworker and he confirmed that I was
laid
off I didn't even know it was happening
and I didn't hear from HR or my boss
because I'm on vacation in
Japan it's a really nice Airbnb but yeah
my coworker called me and he was like
what's going on he's like your slacky
activated I can't find you anymore and I
was like oh well I guess I got laid off
then and turned out a few other people
on my team also got laid off um
yeah it's I don't know I I still have 2
weeks of vacation left and I'm late of I
guess I don't know what's going going to
happen because I'm on a H1B work visa so
I don't know if I can enter the US again
I don't know what will happen to my cats
and the apartment I own in Brooklyn I
guess this is life um that's
it yeah hi everyone my name is Vivian I
moved to the United States in 2018 for
my master study and I've been working in
New York City for the past 5 years a few
weeks ago I was laid off while I was on
vacation visiting families in Asia it
was a tricky situation to be in because
I was on a H1B work visa so re-entering
the us became a problem for me I tried
searching on the internet but I didn't
find too much information about being
terminated overseas as a H1B work visa
holder so I wanted to make a video and
shared everything I learned from this
experience from handling Visa issues to
finding an employment lawyer an
immigration lawyer to negotiating your
severance package I also wanted to share
what you can do in preparation of
potential
layoffs as well as what you should be
doing if you're laid off the intention
of this video is to share knowledge and
raise awareness it is not to attack my
former employer it is not to bait for
your sympathy so I will try to keep it
as structured detailed and informative
as possible that said I will not be
sharing any details about how I
negotiated my severance package and how
much my severance package is in this
video video because that will get me
into trouble legally with that said
let's get started the first part of this
video I wanted to cover the facts that
you absolutely need to know as a H1B
Visa holder so first of all yes they can
fire you anytime anywhere if you are in
an at will employment so when you start
a job if there is an atwi employment in
your employment
contract that means you can quit any
time you want and your employer can fire
you or terminate you any time they want
without advanced notices I saw a lot of
people
online um in on Reddit or under my post
asking if it's possible to get laid off
or terminated while you're on vacation
well it happen to me so it's 100%
possible and no they don't need to wait
for you to finish your vacation or get
back to America they're not legally
required or obligated to do that so yes
that's the first thing it can happen so
make sure you are prepared so now I'm
going to share the facts I learned from
talking to lawyers and researching on
the internet so the second point is H1B
grace period does not apply to you if
you are terminated outside of the United
States it is stated on the USCIS website
on the page titled options for
non-immigrant workers following
termination of employment it is a very
important page I encourage all of you if
you are on the work visa please read
through the page there's so much
information on it basically everything
you need to know and what you can do
after being terminated it as a foreign
worker it's on that page so please find
some time to read it it's so important
but one thing very important to remember
is that you don't have 60 days of grace
period if you are laid of outside of the
United States on the page it says if a
non-immigrant worker is outside the
United States and terminate with no
notice period or the notice period ends
before the worker is able to return then
the grace period does not apply and the
worker must seek another immigration
status that would permit re-entry if the
worker can and in fact does return to
the United States before the notice
period ends that is before the effective
date of
termination then the discretionary grace
period May apply and so that leaves me
to my third point which is you lose your
H1B status the day you are removed from
the payroll I learned that from talking
to a few different lawyers but basically
how USCIS and the immigration officer
decides your termination day is the day
you are removed from the payroll one
thing I learned is that you can
negotiate to stay on the payroll for an
extended period of time even if it's
unpaid as long as you're in the payroll
system you are still in your H1B status
and that means you can return to the US
safely if you want to and point number
three if you're not in a rush to return
to the US you can actually remain
outside of the US say your home country
until you find an employer to sponsor
your H1B for example you've been on your
H1B visa for 2 years that means you have
4 years left on your H1B Visa before you
have to reenter enter the lottery system
so if you are laid off outside of the
United States and you decide to you know
chill at your parents house while
looking for a job and you do find a US
employer who is willing to sponsor your
H1B work visa then you can come back to
the US after they file for your um Visa
petition and get approved and you can
come back and continue to use the rest
of the four years on your H1B Visa so
you can totally do that but for me
because I have two cats um in New York
so I have to come back to take care of
them my friend was taking care of them
and I couldn't let them take care of
them forever so I had to come back in
that case that's when the situation
becomes a little bit tricky according to
the lawyers I spoke to it is a legal
gray
area Okay so if you do want to return to
the United States on the USCIS website
it says You must seek another
immigration status that would permit
re-entry in that case you probably need
to apply for a B1 or B2 tourist visa so
according to the lawyers I spoke to a
lot of their clients were able to come
back to the United stat states with
their H1B stamp and their
i797 document after they're being laid
off and that's because the USCIS hasn't
been notified of their termination so
they were able to come back however the
caveat is that because it's a gray area
if the immigration officer at the custom
asks you if you are still working for
this employer or if you're still
employed by this company which I have
been asked before you have to answer
truthfully otherwise you would be lying
to the US government and that's really
bad and if you answer truthfully then
they have the right to deny your entry
and Deport you so that was what I was
most worried about because I had been
asked that question before and I was
worried that was going to be asked again
which I didn't yeah that's why I was so
worried about entering the US
with like an invalid H1B and then F
found out that I was trying to enter it
illegally so when I was on vacation my
first and only goal was to try to extend
my employment as long as possible until
the day I returned to the
US um yeah that's what I did if you have
the flexibility to change your flight
and come back to the US right away do so
because that's what a lot of people do
and at least from what I heard from my
lawyers so you can do that but just be
careful if you are asked at the custom
if you're still
employed you probably have to tell them
the truth then they will have the right
to decide whether to let you in or not
so that's that's where the risk is okay
so yeah those are the basic facts that
you need to know about being terminated
overseas as a work visa holder but I
would say the most important thing is to
read the website the USCIS website and
that specific page I'm going to link it
in the description please read it even
if you don't think you're going to get
laid off or fired please read it you
never know it could happen to anyone I
got some questions about why I didn't
just use a tourist visa to enter the us
if I had to come back to take care of my
cats well there are two reasons first
you only get 990 days for a tourist visa
at least for toes and if I come in using
a tourist visa that means I'm not able
to use my grace period from my H1B which
means I'm 60 days short so that's why I
was trying to fight to extend my
employment until I returned to the US
safely um the second reason is that one
of the lawyers I consulted told me that
using a B1 or B2 tourist visa could be
questionable because my
purpose of entering the US wouldn't be
pure tourism so it could spark some
questions from the immigration
officer however personally in my opinion
I don't see another way in if you cannot
use your H1B Visa so I guess tourist
visa is the only viable way it's just
that it could be questionable
and um you have less time to look for a
job
and take care of your apartment and
furniture and all that but you can look
for jobs while on a tourist visa you
just cannot participate in the domestic
labor market okay it's also on the USCIS
website so make sure to check that out
and now I want to share some things that
I learned from talking to my lawyers so
first thing first an employment lawyer
is different from an immigration lawyer
so if you have questions about your Visa
your immigration status or entering the
United States you have to find an
immigration lawyer and if you have
questions about servance about
employment about um suing your employer
or sexual harassment or discrimination
on your job then you have to look for an
employment lawyer in the United States
there are two different specializations
for my situation I have to talk to both
types of lawyers tip number two um I
used NYC Bar Association for lawyer
referral so you just need to type in a
short paragraph of what help you need
and then they will recommend three to
five lawyers to you in like a day and
then you can talk to those lawyers some
of them charge a consultation fee some
of them don't so some of them are free
but I think it's a great resource if you
don't know any lawyers or if you don't
have any candidates that's like that's a
good place to go to and the third tip is
Severance I hired an employment lawyer
to review my severance package because
it's like an industry standard or like
commonly recommended practice that you
hire an attorney to walk you through
your Severance and make sure everything
looks okay so I hir an employment lawyer
and what he told me was that Severance
is for the company to buy a piece of
Mind meaning they are giving you money
so you can't sue them in the future or
you can't talk negatively about them in
public online whatever so yeah Severance
for them to buy a peace of mind but they
are not legally obligated to give you
any Severance or any money money or
anything when they fire you the other
thing I learned from talking to my
lawyer was that usually to ask for more
sance pay you have to have proof that
the company did something wrong during
your employment such as discrimination
or misconducts or sexual harassment and
you have to have proof and with that
proof your lawyer can use those ask
leverage to ask for more money for you
but if your former employer never did
anything wrong or you don't have proof
to prove that they've done something
wrong then your lawyer really can't do
anything for you in that case if there's
nothing the lawyer can use against your
former employer you can still ask for
more money by talking about the
contribution you had at that company or
your personal finance or your family
situation how you're the only source of
income for your 10 people family and you
really need more money whatever but the
company is not in any legal obligation
to give you more money or any Severance
so I mean try everything you can but the
result isn't guaranteed the other thing
I learned from my wonderful lawyer is
that if a lot of people are laid off at
the same time as you are then the chance
of you getting more Severance is lower
because if the company gives someone
more Severance then everyone else is
going to ask for more money and they
have to end up giving everyone more
money however if other people all sign
the severance already without asking
then you might have a higher chance of
getting more money that's just what my
lawyer said said it doesn't hurt trying
so I encourage you to try but again the
result is not guaranteed next okay it's
about the timeline of finding a lawyer
finding a lawyer is very timeconsuming
it usually takes around a day to like 3
4 days to find a lawyer and it takes
like a day to two weeks to schedule a
time with the lawyer a lot of them are
really popular a lot of them are busy
they might not have time for you and
then it takes one to 2 weeks for the
lawyer to engage the company in the
negotiation according to my employment
lawyer so if you only have 7 days or two
weeks to consider your severance package
you don't really have a lot of time to
find a lawyer schedule a time and for
the lawyer to engage the company then
there's a good chance that you probably
have to do it yourself yeah so I
recommend having a a list of immigration
lawyers and employment lawyers that you
can
contact just in case you end up in a
situation where you need a lawyer in a
very short time frame that will come in
handy so always prepare for rainy days
and just a bonus point so after having
my employment lawyer look through my
Severance I also used chat GPT to review
the like the review the sance because I
wanted to see how well chat GPT performs
so if you don't have money or budget for
an employment lawyer you can ask chat
GPT to act as an employment lawyer and
go through the severance agreement with
you using 12th grade language and then
Chad GPT will explain the severance
package to you in an easy to understand
understand way because the legal
language could sometimes be very
confusing and hard to understand for
non-english speakers so that's what I
did I think Chad GPT did a good job
however some of the interpretations were
different from my employment lawyer
overall I still recommend a real human
lawyer to review your severance package
but if you don't have the money chachie
PT will do but but I still have to say
the two situations where you shouldn't
um try to save money is
emergency and on lawyers so maybe so
splurge on a lawyer if you need to so in
this part of the video I want to share
some learnings from negotiating and
talking to lawyers and researching on
the internet hopefully it's helpful just
some general tip steps to keep in mind
so first do not trust anyone who is not
an expert in the legal field do not
trust anyone who has a conflict of
interests against you do not trust these
two type of people on any legal advice
and if you do receive legal advice from
non-legal expert or people who have
conflicts of interests against you
please be sure to fact check do your due
diligence and research just please don't
trust whatever they say please I cannot
say more than this but yeah do your due
diligence and fact check do not trust
everyone second tip the same do not
trust everything you see on the inter
internet I saw a lot of false
information on Reddit for example A lot
of people are saying that companies
cannot terminate you while you're on
vacation or when you're overseas well
they can well if they can if your
contract is at will employment but yeah
make sure you um consult an expert a
lawyer an attorney before you make big
decisions just use the information you
see online at as a reference number
three like I said make sure you have the
phone numbers of some lawyers in your
pocket in case you need it because when
you do need them you usually do not have
a lot of time to find them and number
four it is frustrating but very normal
to get push backs when you negotiate
please don't give up when you receive
push back for the first time it's always
worth trying again or trying to ask for
different things when the other person
pushes back in the very beginning it's
because the other person does not have
the decision making power to say yes to
your request so if you keep pushing or
if you start asking for different things
then the other person will have to
escalate and ask for help from their
manager
or their manager's manager by then
you'll have a better chance of getting
what you want because you're actually
talking to the person who has the power
to make a decision so do not give up in
the beginning always try again number
five here are a few things you can ask
for when negotiating your Severance you
can ask for more time in the payroll
system um more time being employed you
can ask for more money of course you can
ask for more more health insurance
coverage or longer health insurance
coverage you can ask for job search
assistance Etc if they cannot give you
one of the things then ask for another
one the point is be polite and
persistent and you have to let go of
your ego because it could be very
embarrassing or very awkward to keep
asking for things non-stop but just
remember be po and be persistent and
keep pushing because eventually you're
the person who is going to live with the
consequences of not asking for more so
just remember you're advocating for your
future self and be polite and be
consistent you'll be fine number five I
personally find having an employment
lawyer was helpful because it made me a
little more confident when I was
negotiating and I felt like the other
party took took me more seriously when I
mentioned my lawyer so although it was
expensive the consultation fee I still
think it was worth it to hire an
employment lawyer and went through at
least like the possibilities of
negotiation and like going through the
severance package and lastly you can
only do so much so I would say I got
lucky that I got to extend my employment
until I came back to the United States
but I know not everyone is so lucky or
can be so lucky and in this kind of
situation a lot of times you just don't
have the power to control everything and
to influence every decision and you
really have to let go of the results
despite you do your best to improve your
chance I know it's really hard but you
have to remember in this kind of
situation you're only job is to do your
research study like regulations or law
about immigration or employment ask for
help if you need to and negotiate as
much as you can and that's it that's all
you need to do the result is not in your
control and you have to let go of it and
always believe that there is a better
arrangement for you from the universe
like it's a blessing in disguise there's
better things for you and I really truly
do feel that way about the layoff this
time I mean I've been sleeping 10 hours
a day and exercising every other day
going to the gym climbing doing
everything I wanted to do when I was
employed but didn't have the time so
trust yourself you can go through it
it's going to be okay and let the
universe and your gut guide you okay the
last part of the video I want to talk
about some risk medication plans that
you should have in case you get laid off
or fired one day unexpectedly so you're
prepared and not like
me but yeah these are a few things that
you should be thinking about and
planning for if you are a H1B work visa
holder or just like a worker in the
United States in general so first make
sure you take advantage of the Warren
notices website so Warren is a US Labor
a law that protects employees their
families and communities by requiring
most employers with 100 or more
employees to provide notification 60
calendar days in advance of planned
closings and mass layups of employees so
they have a website and if you type in
your company's name you'll be able to
see if your company has a layoff um in
the next 60 days personally I didn't see
my company's name name on the website
but I know um this is a law that only
applies to a few States so yeah maybe my
former employer isn't registered in the
state that the law applies to so I don't
know but but if you work for a big tech
company it's usually on the website
you'll be able to see it so if you're
taking a vacation or just in general you
want to be careful
make sure you take advantage of this
website or talk to your co-workers ask
questions get a better understanding of
where the company stands financially and
if there's any planned layoffs or firing
that's going to happen before your
vacation um so you don't go into your
vacation thinking everything's going to
be
fine so you can have a peace of mind
before taking your days off second C say
doesn't enough get a list of lawyers you
can contact in case of emergency period
tip number three make sure you know your
Visa so research the regulations figure
out how long you can stay in the United
States if you are fired or laid off
what's the regulation for being
terminated outside the US um what are
the options for you if you lose your
non-immigrant status what you can do put
potentially to extend or prolong the
time you can stay in the United States
make sure you study the regulations of
your Visa beforehand because when things
happen you don't really have time to
deal with this especially when you're on
a vacation in Japan make sure you learn
about these things when you're safely
nicely employed and have time to do it
with ease tip number four have a plan
for your belongings your leaves your
apartment your properties in America in
the case where you have to leave the
country or in the case where you cannot
come back to the United States for a
longer period of time so think about
what you're going to do with your
apartment your car your furniture your
pets and think about who can help you
who you're going to reach out to if
you're not able to come back or if you
decide not to come back for a longer
period of time what do you want to do
with your apartment do you want to
sublet it Sulee it or if you want to
break your lease how much would that
cost what's the process like you don't
have to know everything by detail but at
least have a rough idea of how you want
to handle these things that would be
very helpful so you don't go into things
blindly you don't panic when emergency
happen tip number five always have an an
emergency fund so in most cases people
get a severance package when they're
laid off however companies are not
legally required to give you anything
any money any benefits when they let you
go so do not Bank on the severance
package also you might see on the
internet that a lot of people are
getting 3 months of their base salary or
even 6 months or even more of their base
out base pay as part of their severance
package those numbers are big numbers
they are a lot and I would say some
companies they don't pay you that much
some companies they don't give you any
money so do not Bank on getting a
severance package because it might be
less than you think it might be zero you
don't you never know so always have
enough savings so you can pay for
unexpected expenses like hiring a lawyer
changing your flight hire hiring a cat
or dog sitter in case you can't come
back to the United States um or some
people they pay for a graduate school to
get um day one CPT so they can stay in
the United States for longer in those
cases you're going to be spending a lot
of money so make sure you have enough
savings to cover your basic expenses
your bills your rent and then all the
other unexpected expenses okay and also
you don't know how long you're going to
be unemployed the job market has been
very tough the past 2 years and you
don't know how long it's going to last
so make sure you have enough savings to
go through this tough time because being
laid of unexpectedly is hard and you
don't want your Finance to be another
thing you worry about when you're
unemployed and my last risk mitigation
advice is to have an identity and a life
outside of your 9 to-5 full-time job I
know a lot of people who Define
themselves with their full-time job or
their
occupation and when they lose the
full-time job they lose a very important
self-identity and that can cause a lot
of anxiety and depression and emot
distress on top of losing a 9 to-5 job
so I think it's important to have a life
and an identity outside of your 9-to-5
job make sure you know who you are
without your 9-to-5 job make sure you
have hobbies you have friends you have
families that you can talk to you can
spend time with outside your nto5 job
because you never know when your 9-to-5
job is going to fire you or or lay you
off when they don't need you and it will
make the transition a lot easier because
you are only dealing with the distress
of losing a job and you're not dealing
with the distress of losing a
self-identity so that really helps you
like get back on your feet quicker and
get back into job job search a lot
quicker so you don't spend time like
being depressed and sad over like a lost
identity and not knowing who you are
yeah so make sure you have like a
healthy balance of work and life when
you're happily employed and you should
be good so we're finally at the last
part of the video where I wanted to
share um the things you could do when
layoff happens these are all very
practical things so I hope they're
helpful the first thing is do not take
anything personally if you're laid off
it means the company wants to save money
they want to cut cost they want their
stock price to go up they want their
financial statement to look better it's
nothing personal please don't take it
personally it applies to negotiation as
well don't take it personally if you get
a no don't take it personally when you
have to ask for something although you
don't want to or you feel embarrassed to
it's nothing about yourself it's all
business just see it as a business
transaction get it done don't waste too
much time feeling bad or feeling sorry
or feeling awkward embarrassed about
yourself you know do what you need to do
see it as a it's not even see it it is a
business transaction from the moment
you're employed to the moment you're
laid off it's all the business
transaction so don't take anything
personally just handle everything
professionally and Let It Go the second
tip is seek help whether it's asking for
job referrals filing for unemployment I
know foreigners if you've been paying
taxes is in the state where you're
filing unemployment benefits for you can
get unemployment benefits so if you need
that extra money file for unemployment
take advantage of the benefits that
you've been paying taxes for seek I
don't know social support from your
family and friends look into Cobra make
sure your health insurance is covered
look for resources online for job
opportunities or mental health support
please don't try to deal with this by
yourself please seek help if you need to
and remember you're not alone in this a
lot of people are laid off a lot of
people reached out to me after seeing my
posts about uh my layoff on Facebook and
I realized a lot of people are going
through the same thing so please
remember you're not alone in this there
is a community online and make sure you
take advantage of your local community
or your inperson community too please
don't deal with this by yourself and
surround yourself with a lot of support
and love and you'll get through this and
the third tip I have is always fact
check I already said it in the beginning
of the video do not trust anyone for
anything do not trust every information
you see on Reddit or on online do not
trust everything someone in a position
of power tells you always fact check
always do your due
diligence and do not trust anyone who's
not a legal expert on their legal advice
and do not trust anyone who has a
conflict of interests against you the
last tip I have for you is to try to
stay as calm and analytical as you can
before making big decisions for example
figuring out um what your options are
for Visa what are the consequences if
you want to use an invalid H1B stamp to
enter the US what are the consequences
if you want to use a tourist visa you
know what are the potential risks what
are the consequences if the immigration
officer asks you if you're still
employed by the company you know make
sure you understand the risks and
consequences of every
um action before making that decision do
not rush into decisions like changing
your flights um coming back to the
United States right away before figuring
out the situation when I got laid off a
lot of people told me to cancel my trip
right away and go back to the United
States ASAP one of the lawyers also
suggested me to change my flight to an
earlier date and go back ASAP before
USCIS updates their system but after
analyzing and weighing all the risks and
consequences I decided not to because I
was still in the beginning of my trip in
Asia I was with my partner and I didn't
want to change my flight and affect my
partner as well and my worst fear was
being deported at the US border because
I have to answer truthfully that I'm not
employed by the company anymore after
changing my flights from Japan to Taiwan
from Taiwan to America that's like my
worst fear and it I don't think it's
worth it so I decided to stick it out
and finish my trip and come back to the
us so you will get a lot of advice and
feedback on what you should do and of
course like by all means consider them
but also make sure you know what the
consequences are and make your own
decision even if the advice comes from a
lawyer you are the person who has to
bear the consequences so make decisions
for yourself and make sure you are
informed of the consequences last but
not least I just want to express my
gratitude to everyone who commented on
my post or messaged me um privately to
show your support and give me words of
encouragement I really appreciated that
and I'm doing well so please don't worry
about me I hope this video helps I hope
if you're a fellow H1B Visa holder I
hope your employment goes well I hope um
you don't have to go through this like I
did if you like this video or find any
of my other videos helpful you're
welcome to support me I'll see you in
the next video before that please take
care bye we